KOLKATA (miningweekly.com) – Vedanta’s closed Sterlite copper plant at Tuticorin, southern India, has been thrown a life line with a committee appointed by the National Green Tribunal (NGT) reporting that the closure of the plant was “unjustified” and “against principles of natural justice”. The NGT-appointed committee, in its report, said that Vedanta had not been given any notice before the closure of the copper plant was issued, nor was Vedanta given a hearing to place its views before any government authority. “The impugned order cannot be sustained as it is against the principle of natural justice and no notice or opportunity of hearing was given to the appellant. The grounds mentioned in the impugned order are not that grievous to justify permanent closure of the plant,” a committee said in its report submitted to the NGT. The committee said that if the NGT ordered the resumption of operations, it should direct that official agencies monitor ground quality. It also suggested that various pollution parameters, like effluents, emissions and waste, be monitored by a committee of the state pollution board, comprising government representatives, experts with domain knowledge and academics. The NGT is expected to take action on the copper plant at its next meeting, based on the report submitted by the committee. Vedanta’s Tuticorin Sterlite copper plant was closed down by order of the local government in May this year, following incidents of pollution and protests by locals, leading to the death of nine people as a result of police action. The NGT-appointed committee also noted in its report that the permanent closure of Sterlite plant would have an adverse impact on copper availability in the country and on the economy in general. According to industry sources, domestic production of refined copper during the first six months of the current financial year was down 54% over the corresponding months of the previous year, largely owing to closure of the 400 000 t/y Sterlite copper smelter. As a result of domestic shortages, copper imports into the country during the period had surged by 167%.