Aim- and FSE-listed Bluejay Mining has appointed well-known resource investor, Ian Henderson, as a nonexecutive director with immediate effect.

The appointment is designed to promote Bluejay and its flagship Dundas ilmenite project, in Greenland, to the international mining investment industry, the company said on Wednesday.

Henderson has spent over 20 years at JP Morgan, during which time he ran both the UK Global Financials Fund and the firm’s Natural Resources funds, the latter of which, at their zenith, comprised assets approaching $10-billion. Before joining JP Morgan, Henderson spent nine years as director and chief investment officer of Wardley Investment Services International and five years as an international portfolio manager in London and New York for Morgan Grenfell & Co. "For over 30 years, Ian was widely regarded as one of the best commodities managers in London, with the JP Morgan Natural Resources fund reporting returning 764% over the last ten years that Ian was at the helm. Attracting someone of Ian's calibre, with a track record of identifying and supporting some of the most exciting and significant companies in the natural resources space over recent decades, is a tremendous endorsement of both the quality and commercial value of our assets, and our team's ability to translate this potential into tangible returns for shareholders,” commented Bluejay CEO Roderick McIllree. "I am delighted to welcome Ian to the board and I look forward to drawing on his significant commercial experience as we finalise offtake discussions and progress Dundas through feasibility ahead of commencement of production from the world's highest-grade ilmenite project," he added. The Dundas project is at an advanced stage and has a total resource of 96-million tonnes at 6.9% ilmenite. This includes the newly identified area of mineralisation at Iterlak Delta, where Bluejay is currently undertaking an exploration programme. The company aims to establish a mining operation by 2019 and is busy completing studies to support this goal.