JOHANNESBURG (miningweekly.com) – Last month’s initial public offering (IPO) on the New York Stock Exchange of Bloom Energy suggests a second, much larger market may be emerging for fuel cells, Greentech Media said this week in a report recording the deployment of Bloom’s technology at 25 Fortune 100 companies. The enlarging market for platinum-using hydrogen fuel cells, which convert chemical energy into electricity ultra cleanly and very quietly, is being accompanied by the devices increasing their electrical efficiency, extending their life cycles and lowering their price tags. Headed by CEO and founder KR Sridhar and bolstered by the presence on the board of former US Secretary of State and retired four-star Army General Colin Powell, the newly listed Bloom Energy is predicting positive cash-flow generation this year, after achieving a 60% post-IPO share price surge. America’s Fuel Cell & Hydrogen Energy Association, which has the platinum-producing Anglo American as one of its leading sponsors, reported earlier this month that New York now has a second fuel cell production facility, 223 new hydrogen fuel cell vehicles were sold in three months by Hyundai and a second-generation fuel cell truck is being tested by Toyota. Technologies powered by platinum-group metals (PGMs) are providing solutions to renewable energy integration, resource scarcity and a growing global population, Mining Weekly Online can report. While platinum demand is crucial for the sustaining of employment in South Africa’s PGM mining sector, the potential for PGM-linked job creation in local manufacturing is also presented through the potential local development of hydrogen infrastructure, fuel cells, energy storage, water purification technology, sensors and durable electronics. South Africa’s State-owned Public Investment Corporation (PIC) last month joined forces with Amplats to promote the development of innovative and competitive technological uses of PGMs. By the PIC and Amplats each committing R1.3-billion to the first venture capital fund of its kind specialising in pioneering technologies and businesses that make use of PGMs, both have become cornerstone investors in AP Ventures, which is led by a specialist global investment team that previously formed part of Amplats’ earlier investment in PGMs opportunities. “This investment will stimulate and sustain the demand for PGMs in the long term, benefitting our clients and preserving the long-term mineral wealth for all South Africans,” said PIC CEO Dr Daniel Matjila of the initiative. The newly restructured Anglo Platinum Marketing has secured interests in two funds managed by AP Ventures. One of these, Altergy Systems, last month announced a fuel cell solution for a nature preserve in Wisconsin, where a 30 kW fuel cell is working in tandem with 200 kW of solar power. Other beneficiaries of the Amplats-backed fuel cell marketing restructure include Food Freshness Technology Holdings, Greyrock Energy, HyET Holdings, Hydrogenius Technologies, Primus Power and United Hydrogen Group. Walmart last week opened an import distribution centre in Alabama that is supported 100% by fuel cell forklifts, Doosan has begun construction of the world’s largest hydrogen fuel cell power station in South Korea and an agreement has been reached for Zhejiang Runfeng Hydrogen Engine Company to manufacture and assemble fuel cell engines for use in Chinese fuel cell vehicles. Fuel cell garbage trucks are being developed for the South Korean government by Hyundai and a fifth retail hydrogen fuelling station has been opened in the German state of Hesse by Air Liquide and Shell. Linde is constructing a facility for a German bus company in North Rhine-Westphalia that will be able to supply hydrogen to vehicles far more quickly, and the South Korean government has committed itself to assisting with the deployment of 1 000 fuel cell buses by 2020. As a producer of fuel cell systems that generate electricity without particulate emission, Bloom Energy has reportedly driven down its costs by 75% since 2009 and increased the rate at which hydrogen is converted into electricity by 45%.