Aim-listed Edenville Energy is planning to complete the upgrade of the processing plant at its Rukwa coal project, in Tanzania, by the end of September, which will allow for increased throughput. A Lamella clarifier water treatment plant is nearing assembly stage completion and will be installed on site for commissioning later this month. After reviewing a number of options for acquiring a pre-screening plant to remove the majority of coal fines before they reach the washing circuit, both in Tanzania and overseas, a suitable configuration has been selected, the company said on Tuesday. The equipment is already in Tanzania, it explained, noting that it negates the need to ship and import. Construction and commissioning are expected to be completed on site over the next six to eight weeks. Meanwhile, Rukwa processed about 17 530 t of run-of-mine (RoM) coal, producing 5 259 t of washed coal and 7 639 t of fine coal from May 25 to August 9. Of the 5 259 t of washed coal, 3 231 t have been sold and shipped, the company said on Tuesday. This, Edenville explained, equates to an average daily throughput of RoM coal of about 230 t from May 25 to August 9, with average daily sale shipments of 43 t. For July, the average daily sale shipments were 51 t. The amount shipped on an average daily basis in August is expected to increase further based on the current order pipeline, which Edenville pointed out compares to the average daily throughput of RoM coal of 143 t from January 1 to May 24 and average daily sale shipments over this period of 22 t. In other developments, a second excavator is now working in the Namwele area of the project, where about 3 000 t of coal have already been mined. This is in addition to the excavator working in the Mkomolo area. Edenville believes the results of on-site laboratory analysis are encouraging, showing material with a high calorific value of over 6 000 kcal/kg on a washed basis. Initial wash results are also looking positive, with a washed yield of over 50%. The company further noted that work is progressing with mining consultants, Sound Mining, to delineate the next areas for development at Mkomolo. “We expect to have an updated mining plan completed in September, which will allow work to start on opening up new seams located to the north of the current excavation,” Edenville Energy said on Tuesday. Further, following previous deliveries to certain customers, Edenville is now at an advanced stage of negotiating several longer-term contracts for coal supply, adding that although no guarantees can be given that these long-term contracts will be secured, the plant upgrade will allow this future production to be guaranteed to customers.