JOHANNESBURG (miningweekly.com) – They say South Deep will be the last gold mine standing but every report coming out of it indicates that it is a much harder nut to crack than anticipated. The upshot has been a loss of R4-billion over five years and the need now to cut more jobs at the troubled mine, which the company, headed by CEO Nick Holland, stated on Tuesday was staffed for a far higher production rate than is currently being achieved. Headline earnings per share for the six months to June 30 are expected to be unchanged at $0.08 per share, rendering the basic loss per share 743% below the basic earnings of the first half of last year. Management intends to start consultations under Section 189 of the Labour Relations Act. It is envisaged that 1 100 permanent employees could potentially be impacted by the proposed restructuring. In addition, 460 contractors could also potentially be impacted. South Deep currently employs 3 614 full-time employees and 1 940 contractors. South Deep has been further impaired by R4.8-billion to a carrying value of R20.7-billion. With  overall labour productivity significantly below the industry average, a restructuring plan is under way for the deep gold that was meant to set a new trail in mechanised mining. Cash burn in the second quarter of this year was R295-million following the R361-million of the first quarter. Gold Fields on Tuesday cited the key challenge as being the difficulty in transitioning the mine, acquired in 2006, from one run with a conventional mining mindset and practices to mining with a modern, bulk, mechanised mining approach. South Deep is a complex and unique mine, that has faced persistent issues. Operating and overhead costs, which are not aligned with the profile of a high-volume, medium-grade operation or with current output levels, have been rising, with consistent failure to meet mining and production targets. Long hole stoping mining at 3 000 m, with attendant ground conditions requiring extensive support has proved too complex, with extensive infrastructure and support services required to underpin mining activities, which continue to operate sub- optimally, impacting backfill and stope turn over. Also, South Deep, the company stated, was staffed for a far higher production rate than was currently being achieved, resulting in  overall labour productivity being significantly below industry average. Despite optimising the mining method, extensive training and skills development, changing shift and work configurations, and outsourcing functions, the mine continues to make losses which have totalled R4-billion over the past five years. During the first quarter of this year, South Deep completed the second phase of its organisational restructuring plan, focusing on the lower levels of the organisation, through a voluntary retrenchment programme, which resulted in 261 employees leaving the company. This followed the restructuring in the last quarter of last year at the more senior levels of the business, which comprised a 25% reduction, or 47 employees, at the management level. Although this restructuring was mostly voluntary, it nonetheless had a significant negative impact on morale and consequently productivity and output during the first half of this year. In addition, continued low mobile equipment reliability and productivity, the intersection of faults and dykes in the high-grade corridor three slowed production rates. These challenges have resulted in an underperformance on development and destress mining and have impacted stope availability and output. Stope availability and output has also been adversely affected as a result of slow loading and backfilling. These challenges will not only impact the mine’s 2018 performance but the knock-on effect will carry through into 2019 and beyond. Despite the most recent restructuring, South Deep continues to face a number of organisational and structural challenges that directly impacts both short and consequently long-term performance. The mine did not see much improvement in the second quarter of this year, even after the restructuring and shift changes, with production only marginally higher at 1 518 kg (49 000 oz) from 1 485 kg (48 000 oz) in the first quarter. “South Deep needs to be operated and scheduled as a safe, deep-level, capital-intensive, but highly mechanised and efficient operation. This will require a reduction in fleet and the associated labour complement as well as an improvement in effectiveness and productivity to build sufficient margin in the business to carry the high fixed cost base and deliver sustainable profitability,” the company said in a release to Creamer Media’s Mining Weekly Online. South Deep has over a number of years embarked on a host of initiatives to improve the productivity and deliver sustainable profitability, which to date have not had the desired impact. In the context of continued negative cash flow, management believes that the best course of action to address these issues includes further restructuring at the mine. The proposed restructuring at South Deep aims to consolidate mining activity to increase focus and to match the cost structure to the current level of performance. SECTION 189 PROCESS COMMENCES Mineral Resources Minister Gwede Mantashe has been informed that Section 189 notices will be served on its two representative trade unions, the National Union of Mineworkers and UASA. This will be followed by a 60-day consultation process, which will be facilitated by the Commission for Conciliation, Mediation and Arbitration. In support of returning the mine to sustainable profitability, Gold Fields is proposing a temporarily suspension of mining activities at 87 Level and redeployment of these mining crews into the 4W corridor. The eastern part of the mine will be serviced from the Twin Shafts and South Shaft operations will be restaffed to a single shift per day. Water and backfill reticulation, water pumping and ventilation will be provided to the full mining operation. Development has outperformed the plan in recent years, which allows for flexibility to reduce growth capital expenditure for the next 18 months to lower the cash burn. Given the significant impact of the restructuring from late 2017 and early 2018, the impact of the proposed large-scale restructuring of production in 2019 and beyond is unquantifiable, rendering the previously guided build-up plan for the mine prone to a high degree of risk and uncertainty and no longer one that can be be relied upon. In addition, based on the current situation, detailed mine planning will be undertaken over the next few months. Once the full impact of the mine planning exercise and proposed restructuring is completed, Gold Fields will provide guidance for 2019 and beyond. The underperformance in 2018 and the resultant knock-on impact has necessitated a further impairment of South Deep. As discussed above, Gold Field's is unable to provide guidance for 2019 and beyond. TRADING STATEMENT Normalised earnings are expected to be $0.05 per share, 44% lower than the US$0.09 per share in last year’s first half. The net loss has been impacted by non-recurring South Deep impairment of a gross R6.5-billion or R4.8-billion net of tax, as well as $96-million related to the change to contractor mining in Ghana, involving $65-million for retrenchment and $31-million on fleet and inventory. Attributable group gold-equivalent second-quarter production of 504 000 oz is expected, up on the first quarter, with all-in sustaining costs (AISC) held at $973/oz compared with $955/oz in the first quarter and all-in costs (AIC) of $1 187/oz, up on the first quarter’s $1 150/oz. Half-year gold equivalent production is expected to be 994 000 oz, with AISC of $965/oz and AIC of $1 169/oz. Gold Fields will release half-year financial results on Thursday.