JOHANNESBURG (miningweekly.com) – The Environmental Commissioner of Namibia has issued a clearance certificate to allow for the abstraction of water from the Orange river for African Tantalum’s (Aftan’s) Namibia Tantalite Investment (NTI) mine. Aim-listed Kazera Global, which owns an interest in Aftan, stated that the certification represents a significant milestone for Aftan and signifies a major endorsement by the Namibian government for the project. “The receipt of the certificate is a positive step towards alleviating any concerns regarding future water availability, ensuring that projected water needs can be satisfied from the Orange river, as well as water boreholes within the project licence area,” Kazera said, adding that a bidding process for the laying of the pipework will start shortly. Meanwhile, as part of an exploration programme to define a Joint Ore Reserves Committee- (Jorc-) compliant resource on the Lepidolite and Homestead locations, in Namibia, Kazera received encouraging preliminary drilling results compiled by mining consultancy MSA Group from boreholes at the two pegmatites. The drill results confirm lithium and tantalum mineralisation. “Our exploration campaign continues and these results have delivered high grades in both minerals. To achieve 8 159 ppm tantalum over 1.68 m is encouraging and demonstrates the wider potential within the licence,” said Kazera CEO Larry Johnson. He added that the company will consolidate the results with further drilling during the year, coupled with channel sampling within the Homestead underground orebody, which will further build the confidence level of the total mineralisation within the mineable area. Meanwhile, Kazera also announced on Wednesday its interim financial results for the six months ended December 31, reporting that total current assets amounted to £2.4-million, an improvement on the net current asset position of £403 000 as at June 30, 2017. On February 9, Kazera sent its fourth shipment of industry-leading high-grade tantalum, reaching grades of more than 51% purity, to its primary customer. “Communication continues with a second potential customer around the supply of tantalum, while discussions [have been initiated] with a third potential customer,” said Johnson. “We have taken significant positive strides during the period and have strong momentum into 2018. Successful plant upgrades are driving increased productivity rates as we meet the ramp-up plan and continue to produce world class tantalum to some of the most stringent market specifications,” he added.