PERTH (miningweekly.com) – Queensland’s Strong and Sustainable Resource Communities Act will come into force at the end of March, prohibiting large resource projects from having a 100% fly-in, fly-out (Fifo) workforce. Minister for State Development, Manufacturing, Infrastructure and Planning, Cameron Dick said on Thursday that this was good news for regional communities because it ensured that locals had access to fair job opportunities and allowed existing workers to reside in regional communities. “The Strong and Sustainable Resource Communities Act delivers on the Queensland government’s commitment to prohibit 100% Fifo workforces,” he said. “It also gives workers choices through two statutory tools approved on March 26, by the Coordinator-General - a list of large resource projects captured by the new Act and a new enhanced social impact assessment guideline.” Under the Act, large resource projects are those that have 100 or more workers and an environmental authority. They are also located within a 125-km radius of a nearby regional community with at least 200 residents. “Following an extensive consultation process, Queensland’s independent Coordinator-General has initially listed 61 large resource projects - including 43 coal, 15 mineral and three liquefied natural gas projects - and listed 230 nearby regional communities associated with these projects,” Dick said. “This means any project on the list currently operating with a 100% Fifo workforce now has to transition its workforce to include recruitment of workers from nearby regional communities within six months. “From March 30, the large resource projects listed are also prohibited from discriminating against residents of nearby regional communities in the future recruitment of workers. The Minister noted that central Queensland towns like Moranbah, which is a nearby regional community close to 25 large resource projects, would realise significant benefits, with locals having a fairer opportunity of securing employment under the new Act. “Going forward, the new social-impact assessment guideline for projects will also support local and regional resource communities. Project owners will have to demonstrate to the Coordinator-General that their workforce and supply chain arrangements provide opportunities to build strong and sustainable resource communities.” The social-impact assessment guideline requires owners of future projects to engage with local communities and stakeholders and ensure that these communities benefit from the project through employment and business opportunities. Project owners are also required to safeguard the health and wellbeing of communities. “The commencement of this legislation is a great step forward in delivering positive social and economic outcomes for resource communities across Queensland,” Dick said.