PERTH (miningweekly.com) – An independent scientific inquiry into hydraulic fracturing (fracking) in the Northern Territory has found that any risks associated with the practice could be mitigated. Inquiry chairperson Justice Rachel Pepper said this report provided recommendations to mitigate to acceptable levels the identified risks associated with any onshore shale gas development if the government lifted the moratorium. “No industry is without risk, and any onshore shale gas industry is no exception. However, it is the panel’s opinion, expressed in the final report, that if all of the recommendations are implemented, the identified risks associated with any onshore shale gas industry can be mitigated or reduced to an acceptable level, and in some cases, the risks can be eliminated.” Pepper said that while the inquiry’s scope was broader than that of previous inquiries into unconventional gas in the Northern Territory, the inquiry nevertheless built upon the previous bodies of work. In addition, the inquiry had a mandate to consult widely, unlike previous inquiries and reviews. “The inquiry has taken its mandate to consult widely very seriously through its stakeholder engagement, live-streamed public hearings and community forums, held throughout the territory.” The inquiry held a total of 52 community forums and 151 public hearings right across the territory and has also received 1 257 written submissions. Chief Minister Michael Gunner has welcomed the release of the final report saying that the government would carefully consider the report’s recommendations and take as long as was needed to make the right decision for the state. “Once the final report has been carefully considered we will do what we have always promised Territorians - either ban fracking in the Northern Territory or allow it in highly regulated circumstances in tightly prescribed areas. “We will not put at risk existing fishing, farming, tourism and cattle jobs for the possibility of jobs from fracking,” Gunner said. The Australian Petroleum Production and Exploration Association (Appea) has also welcomed the release of the final report, with Appea director for South Australia and the Northern Territory Matthew Doman saying that with the conclusion of the 15-month inquiry, it was now critical the Northern Territory government made a prompt decision to give certainty to investors, local businesses, traditional owners, landholders and all Territorians. “The final report confirms that developing the territory’s natural gas resources would have significant economic and employment benefits for the Northern Territory,” Doman said. “While Appea argued against the need for yet another inquiry into hydraulic fracturing, the inquiry has enabled genuine questions in the community to be addressed in an independent and expert manner.”