PERTH (miningweekly.com) – The Northern Territory government has revealed a five-point gas strategy to drive its vision of creating a world-class hub for gas production, manufacturing and services, by 2030. The strategy will be aimed at getting more liquefied natural gas (LNG) in Darwin, and expand the Darwin LNG export hub, growing the gas supply and service industry, establishing a gas manufacturing industry, growing research, innovation and training capacity, and contributing to national energy security on the East Coast. Northern Territory Chief Minister Michael Gunner said this week that the Territory government’s number one priority was to create local jobs. “Diversifying our economy, investing in job-creating infrastructure, turbo-charging tourism, growing our population, repositioning the Territory as a place of opportunity, to visit, study, do business, invest, live and raise a family, these will all create more jobs for more Territorians,” Gunner said. “Our five-point gas strategy will create jobs through exploration, production, supply, export, manufacturing, research and innovation. “There is enormous opportunity in the Territory for the diversification of the gas industry, which will create many hundreds of local jobs.” To implement the strategy, Gunner has re-established the Northern Territory Gas Task Force, which was disbanded by the previous government. The Australian Petroleum Production and Exploration Association (Appea) has welcomed the strategy to capture the potential from the region’s existing LNG industry, and the emerging onshore resources. “At the same time that southern states continue to restrict development of new gas supplies, the Northern Territory government is showing strong leadership and supporting jobs and growth through its willingness to get on with developing its own resources,” said Appea South Australia and Northern Territory director Matthew Doman. “Darwin is home to what is becoming a world-class LNG hub based on the existing Darwin LNG project and the soon-to-be producing Ichthys project along with the Prelude floating LNG facility offshore. “A 2017 joint study by the Northern Territory government and industry showed that Darwin LNG can be expanded at a globally competitive cost, below that of recent Australian projects. “Appea’s member companies stand ready to invest billions of dollars in new projects offshore and onshore in the Territory. These companies are determined to do this in a safe and sustainable manner and to generate real benefits for all Territorians,” Doman said.