JOHANNESBURG (miningweekly.com) – National Treasury should abandon its plans to introduce carbon tax, which will result in the closure of ferrochrome smelters at a time of desperate need for job retention and export promotion. This is the consensus of opinion canvassed by Mining Weekly Online following last Friday’s release of the Integrated Resource Plan (IRP). With the IRP enhancing the prospect of carbon emission reduction in the next decade because of the backing it gives to renewable energy, Treasury’s continued insistence on the imposition of carbon tax is being seen as unnecessary. The main purpose of the carbon tax was to generate funding for research and development into carbon emission, which the IRP can now significantly reduce. “The need for a carbon tax has declined significantly in the light of the IRP,” a ferrochrome industry source commented to Mining Weekly Online on Tuesday. Much of the carbon emitted in to the South African atmosphere comes from State electricity utility Eskom. If this IRP is promulgated and implemented, renewable energy generation will increase significantly and result in the carbon intensity of Eskom declining significantly in the next ten to 15 years. In this way, South Africa’s carbon intensity will fall pointing to a carbon tax not being needed, as many other countries have found. “It will happen as a result of the generation of renewable energy, which means there is no need to introduce the carbon tax that will put South Africans out of business and send South African ore to China that will put more carbon into the atmosphere,” the source reiterated. South Africa has already lost its ferrochrome leadership to China, which produces most of the world’s ferrochrome smelting South African chrome ore, but n a less environmentally protective manner. “If carbon tax is imposed, more South African smelters will close, more chrome ore will go to China, where smelters are far less efficient from a carbon perspective than South African smelters and more carbon will be emitted than from smelters here. “What you will really be doing is exporting South African jobs and allowing more carbon to be emitted elsewhere, which makes no sense as South Africa enters a technical recession,” the source said. The IRP is seen as the correct route owing to its focus on sun and wind energy. “Throw the carbon tax idea away and focus on an ore export tax. In that way Treasury will do a world of goo for the South African economy,” the source added. In that way Treasury will still have a source of tax and attract foreign investment in the building of smelters in South Africa owing to Southern Africa hosting the overwhelmingly largest proportion of chromium resources.