Kavango Resources has recorded positive results from geophysical follow-up work carried out since the completion of Phase 1 of the airborne electromagnetic (AEM) survey over its Kalahari Suture Zone (KSZ) project, in Botswana. The company noted in a statement issued on Monday that ground-based audio frequency magnetotelluric (AMT) surveys have now been conducted over the northern part of the KSZ project and also over the Ditau prospect within the KSZ project area. AMT surveys are able to determine the exact location of conductors, as well as their orientation, depth and size. KSZ PROJECT – NORTHERN Ground-based AMT surveys have now been carried out over six of the 26 conductors identified in the AEM survey (Phase 1) in the northern part of the KSZ project. Selection for ground follow-up was based on the strength of the conductors and the coincidence of a zinc in soil anomaly on the surface above the conductor. Zinc, which is the most mobile of the base metal elements, acts as a pathfinder to mineralisation at depth. Several of the conductors appear to be large, steeply dipping bodies that may represent mineralisation from near surface down to at least 400 m from the surface. These conductors all represent potential drill targets. The ground follow-up programme will continue in the northern part of the KSZ project to investigate more of the Phase 1 AEM anomalies over the coming months. KSZ PROJECT – DITAU PROSPECT At the Ditau prospect, which has a strike of over 7 km, multiple lines of AMT surveying have now identified two elongated conductors extending from just below the surface to depths in excess of 600 m. The two Ditau conductors are open at both ends and extend north-south for at least 4 km and represent very compelling geophysical anomalies that are both coincident with strong zinc in soil anomalies. The Ditau magnetic body is associated with a significant gravity anomaly and probably represents a mafic intrusive at depth, stated Kavango. These conductors represent the priority drill targets for the first part of next year. The notable coincidence of significant (likely mineralised) EM conductors at depth with zinc in soil anomalies on surface is posited as evidence that Kavango’s soil sampling technique is able to detect mineralisation above considerable depths of cover. Kavango believes that a combination of AEM surveying, zinc in soil geochemistry and AMT ground-based resistivity surveying will continue to identify multiple high-quality drill targets over the coming months. “We are extremely pleased to be able to report that the initial AEM survey results show that a number of the conductive anomalies identified coincide with significant geochemical (zinc in soil) anomalies,” Kavango CEO Michael Foster commented. Priority targets have now been followed up on the ground with AMT resistivity surveys and exciting potential drill targets have been identified, including at the Ditau prospect, which forms part of the KSZ project, he informed. The KSZ project covers more than 9 000 km2 of prospective exploration ground including the 450 km KSZ magnetic trend, which has the potential to host Norilsk type copper/nickel/platinum-group element massive sulphide orebodies, he said. “This huge area, which is entirely covered by surface (Kalahari) sand cover, has not previously been explored for minerals using modern techniques.”