Canadian major Teck Resources has announced the appointment of seven people to vice president positions. Greg Brouwer is VP of technology and innovation, Amparo Cornejo is VP for Chile sustainability and corporate affairs, Chris Dechert is VP for South America, Sepanta Dorri is VP for corporate development, Karla Mills is VP for project development, Crystal Prystai is VP and corporate controller and Keith Stein is VP for major projects. As VP of technology and innovation, Brouwer is responsible for advancing technology activities and strategy at Teck. He joined Teck in 1998 and was previously GM, technology and innovation. Cornejo is responsible for corporate and government affairs, employee communications, health, safety, environment and community systems, and environmental permitting activities for Teck’s operations and development projects in Chile. Cornejo joined Teck in 2014 and was previously director, social responsibility and corporate affairs. As VP of South America, Dechert is responsible for directing Teck’s operations in Chile to achieve overall site objectives for safety, sustainability, production and financial performance. Dechert also supports Teck’s various interests in Peru. He joined Teck in 2009 and was previously VP of copper operations, Chile. As VP, corporate development, effective December 10, Dorri will be responsible for the identification and pursuit of external growth opportunities while also providing corporate support to each business unit's internal growth initiatives. Dorri joins Teck from Teranga Gold Corporation. In her new role, Mills is responsible for the successful delivery of capital projects across Teck’s base metals and steelmaking coal business units. Mills joined Teck in 2013 and was previously acting VP of project development. As VP and corporate controller, Prystai will be responsible for all of Teck’s corporate controller functions. She joined the company in 2008 and is currently director of finance, reporting and compliance. As VP of major projects, Stein will focus on the successful delivery of projects across Teck. Stein joined Teck in 2012 as VP project development and was most recently acting project director for Quebrada Blanca Phase 2 in Chile.