Four local Blouberg youth-owned small, medium-sized and microenterprises (SMMEs) have received grants of up to R50 000 from the National Youth Development Agency (NYDA) through the intervention and support from De Beers’ Venetia Mine. Thabosilakhu Empire, Betty Catering and Deco, Roadhouse Mollax Enterprise and agricultural business Wozilex, are set to benefit through capacity building and skills development training aimed at empowering youth-owned local SMMEs to become sustainable and contribute towards socioeconomic development and job creation. In 2017, 26 local businesses graduated from the De Beers Zimele Incubation programme and have all benefited from mentoring and other business related training courses in 2018. A further 94 local SMMEs have also benefited from training programmes through the De Beers Zimele Hub, NYDA and the Small Enterprise Development Agency (Seda). “We are very excited to have played a role in not only assisting the SMMEs with training and development but to also have played a role in [giving] them access to much-needed equipment necessary for the growth of their businesses,” commented Venetia Mine Enterprise and Supplier Development senior commercial manager Gregory Petersen in a statement on Monday. NYDA plays a significant role in ensuring that stakeholders, such as government, the private sector and civil society, prioritise youth development challenges and contribute towards identifying and implementing lasting solutions. Further, NYDA designs and implements microlevel (individual), meso-level (community) and macro-level (national) programmes aimed at improving the lives and opportunities available to young people. “As the partnership between NYDA and De Beers in Blouberg municipality deepens and matures, we are hopeful that more young entrepreneurs will benefit through skills development and sustainable jobs,” said NYDA Polokwane branch manager Percy Madziwo. NYDA is currently working with De Beers to finalise memorandums of understandings to cement the enterprise development partnership and collaboration in Blouberg and Musina municipalities, he informed. “Following the support I received from nine months of training at the De Beers Zimele incubation programme, I am now able to design a feasible business plan to run my business successfully. “I was also able to connect with NYDA, which offered me a grant to purchase catering equipment. I hope to use this opportunity to grow my [business],” commented Roadhouse Mollaz Enterprise owner Moloko Manaka. The other owners expressed similar sentiments of gratitude for the support they have received.