Anton Lubbe has resigned as VP of Eastern Platinum’s (Eastplats’) South African operations, effective August 31. The company said in a corporate update on Thursday that it would reorganise his duties between CEO Diana Hu, COO Andrea Zhang, and through the promotion of Hannelie Hanson to GM of South African Operations. Eastplats further reported that the framework agreement that its subsidiary, Barplats Mines, had entered into with Union Goal Offshore Solutions relating to construction, mining and processing of the tailings resource and the offtake of chrome concentrate from the Barplats Zandfontein Upper Group 2 tailings facility has been extended until August 31. “The company continues the construction phase of the retreatment project, with the expected completion date estimated at the end of the third quarter,” it noted. Construction work on the chrome processing circuit continues and significant construction milestones have been met. Progress continues on schedule at the tailings facility to prepare for the mining phase and progress has also been achieved on building the walls for the deposition of tailings, with the target for initial production as early as the fall of 2018. LITIGATION Eastplats, meanwhile, stated that, owing to inaction and delay by Alpha Global Capital on its claim initiated against the company in South Africa, Eastplats has been advised that the matter has been removed from the court roll for a hearing that had been scheduled for September. There is currently no date scheduled for this action. Eastplats said it would continue to oppose any attempt for reinstatement of the court case and would seek to have the claim struck and dismissed. The company has also recently received notice of a further claim filed by Alpha Global in the British Virgin Islands seeking repayment of amounts Alpha Global alleges are owed to it under the same 2007 agreement that was the basis of its South African claim. Alpha Global is seeking payment of about R30.80-million plus an amount it alleges is owing for default interest, for a total claim of R142.89-million. Alpha Global’s claims arise under an agreement entered into in 2007 in connection with Eastplats’ acquisition of an additional 5% interest in Barplats Investments. The company is of the view that no amount is currently owing to Alpha Global. The company will take steps to oppose the claim.