PERTH (mininweekly.com) – The Western Australian government has announced the formation of a taskforce to capitalise on the region’s lithium and energy material potential. The taskforce will oversee development of a Lithium and Energy Materials Strategy to build on Western Australia's competitive advantages, and to develop a world-leading energy materials industry that maximises benefits to Western Australia and creates jobs. The taskforce will be chaired by the Minister for Mines and Petroleum and will consist of senior government representatives who will engage with key companies and will be informed by an industry stakeholder reference group. "The availability of lithium and other energy materials in Western Australia creates a once-in-a-lifetime opportunity for our state,” said Premier Mark McGowan on Thursday.  "My government is committed to the development of this industry to boost our economy and create long-term jobs for Western Australians.  "The taskforce will do the work, in consultation with industry, to ensure our state is front and centre in production of battery technologies, and will also work to make sure these materials can be processed here in Western Australia to maximise local jobs." The Association of Mining and Exploration Companies (AMEC) has welcomed the formation of the taskforce, with CEO Warren Pearce saying it was a clear signal that the state was open for business, and determined to play a much larger role in the lithium and battery minerals value chain. “A Ministerial taskforce will provide co-ordination for the multiple government departments that will be critical in planning and approvals.  They will have a key role in ensuring there are no regulatory hurdles that slow the development of this new industry,” Pearce said. “The Lithium and Energy Materials Strategy is needed to attract international companies that hold the necessary technology to undertake further battery mineral precursor development,” he added. It is expected the taskforce will present recommendations to the state government within six months.  Western Australia mines over 60% of the world’s supply of lithium and is endowed with all of the other minerals necessary to develop further down the battery minerals value chain.