The Canadian government has announced a $5-million investment to support TSX- and NYSE-listed Goldcorp's Borden project, which will be the first underground mine in the country to replace all diesel mobile equipment with battery electric vehicles. The new all-electric Borden, in Chapleau, Ontario, is set to begin commercial production in the second half of next year. "We believe the days of diesel use for underground mining equipment are numbered and electrification of our mobile fleet is a logical way to significantly reduce the mine's environmental footprint," Goldcorp president and CEO David Garofalo said on Monday, announcing the government funding. Goldcorp is partnering with “like-minded” technology suppliers, including MacLean Engineering and Sandvik, provincial and federal governments and First Nations to commercialise clean technologies. The project would be funded by Natural Resources Canada's Clean Growth Programme, which is a $155-million investment fund for clean technology research and development and demonstration projects in three Canadian sectors: energy, mining and forestry. Natural Resources Minister Amarjeet Sohi added in the joint Goldcorp statement that government believed improved environmental performance in the mining sector was a key path to a low-carbon economy. "This project helps advance clean technologies to commercial readiness, creates good middle class jobs and reduces greenhouse gas emissions." The miner highlighted in the statement that it had successfully spurred innovation in the mining sector through its #DisruptMining challenge and that it had invested more than $10-million in a range of start-ups and new technologies in the past two years. #DisruptMining offers entrepreneurs a platform to bring disruptive and exponential technologies to the sector, whether it is unlocking exploration opportunities; finding operational and production efficiencies; reducing the environmental footprint and delivering on sustainability commitments; or developing alternative ways to finance capital projects. Goldcorp is accepting applications from innovators interested in pitching their idea at the #DisruptMining innovation expo until November 5.