Earthmoving equipment manufacturer Volvo Construction Equipment on Thursday launched a new 95 t rigid hauler for the coal and bulk commodities industries in Southern Africa. Its local partner, construction equipment company Babcock Equipment, would provide the support and services for the machines, said Volvo Construction Equipment president of Europe, Middle East and Africa sales Carl Slotte. The R100E rigid hauler, which has a 783 kW, 4 600 Nm, 30 ℓ QST30 Cummins engine and a 60 m3 bin, is Volvo’s re-entry into the rigid hauler market following its acquisition of material handling company Terex’s off-highway trucks business in 2014. Babcock Equipment MD Dave Vaughn said the rigid hauler opened a new market for the company. The hauler has been tested in South Africa over the past 12 months and, in partnership with the Volvo engineers, has been refined to ensure that it is able to operate efficiently and effectively in South African conditions. The company had already received orders for three of the new rigid haulers from South African clients and had received expressions of interest for four more. Babcock would also demonstrate the haulers on site with its key clients in the coal sector, said Vaughn. The hauler has an array of sensors and systems, including a 360° camera system, an overspeed control system, component and hydraulics sensors, and telematics capabilities to ensure safety and enable remote monitoring of the machines. Vaughn highlighted that the team focused on designing a robust and easily serviceable machine for the Southern African market. The bin has been designed to eliminate the common dovetail design, which reduces the wear on the bin. The V-slope plate also provides a low centre of gravity. Additionally, the machine has ports to view the levels of grease on the axles and the oil, hydraulic fluids and fuel inlets are clustered together. The engine components are also readily accessible and help to make servicing easy. “The front suspension, which is a MacPherson-strut type, has been widened to provide higher stability and lower leaning during cornering. The R100E rigid hauler is suited for well-established opencast mining operations with moderate inclines and roads that are in good condition.” Volvo Construction Equipment Rigid Haulers VP and Terex Trucks MD Paul Douglas said the Motherwell factory, in Scotland, which manufactures the rigid haulers, had 70 years of experience and had been given a significant boost in safety, quality and capacity through investment by the Volvo group. “The R100E has been designed to meet customer demands for a rigid hauler that delivers high performance and productivity, low total cost of ownership, easy serviceability and good operator comfort. “It builds on Terex Trucks’ 84-year heritage and incorporates feedback from 60 key industrial customers across many different geographic regions and operating conditions, hence the slogan that the R100E is made by our customers.” Babcock’s Middelburg facility has bays that can accommodate the rigid haulers, confirmed Babcock Africa CEO Roger O’Callaghan, and its technical and sales staff had received in-depth training to service and support the machines. Babcock will sell and support the haulers in South Africa, Mozambique, Zimbabwe, Namibia, Zambia and Botswana. Further, O’Callaghan highlighted that Volvo had launched its Volvo Financial Services in South Africa to assist clients with financing for its equipment, trucks and buses. This should help to reduce the funding gap customers experience, and the financial lease is a fixed monthly payment model. Clients have the option to return the machine, extend the lease or buy the machine at the end of the lease period. Babcock aimed to grow its share of the rigid hauler market in Southern Africa to about 20%, concluded Vaughn.