PERTH (miningweekly.com) – Energy major Shell has announced plans to produce more gas from its QGC joint venture, in the Western Downs region of Queensland. Under the Goog-a-binge project, Shell will progressively drill 250 new wells during 2019 and 2020, which will connect the existing QGC gas processing plants and bring about 930 PJ of gas to market over the next three decades. Shell Australia chairperson Zoe Yujnovich said on Tuesday that Project Goog-a-binge would further boost Queensland’s regional economy and demonstrated Shell’s commitment to bring more gas to market. “Project Goog-a-binge will deliver more and cleaner energy for both our Australian and liquefied natural gas export customers for decades,” Yujnovich said. “The project is expected to create or sustain up to 350 jobs, the majority of which will be in regional Queensland and generate business opportunities for local suppliers – a substantial and ongoing boost for the local economy,” she said. Queensland Mines Minister Dr Anthony Lynham welcomed the announcement, saying that the latest expansion plan would help ensure sustained gas supply to domestic customers, as well as royalties to fund frontline services across the state. “Most importantly, it will pump millions of dollars into local household budgets, local stores and local businesses for the next 30 years.” Queensland Resources Council (QRC) CEO Ian Macfarlane applauded Shell for its continued support of the Queensland gas industry. “More gas being produced is good news for all gas customers, both domestic and export. With a go-slow on gas development in New South Wales, and a blanket ban on some types of gas projects in Victoria, what the Southern states are really saying is they’re not prepared to support local jobs and local industry. “Queensland is putting up its hand for more investment, made possible by a strong resources industry that creates jobs, supports regional communities and has paid A$387-million in agreements with landholders,” Macfarlane said. QGC will start pre-construction and site preparation activities at some sites next month, with wells to start being drilled from January 2019 through to December 2019, subject to government approvals.