President Cyril Ramaphosa has assured foreign and domestic investors of government’s commitment to the protection of property rights as South Africa moves to implement a “fair and equitable land reform process”. Speaking at the South African Investment Conference, in Johannesburg, Ramaphosa promised the 1 300 business delegates present that “your investment in South Africa is safe”, before unveiling commitments worth hundreds of billions of rand. Government's commitment to accelerating land reform to redress past injustices was reaffirmed, as well was its support of transformation in the agricultural sector. However, the President said land and agrarian reform would be pursued, “while providing certainty to those who own land, to those who need land and to those who are considering investing in the economy”. Ramaphosa’s goal of attracting $100-billion in investment over the coming five years was initially seen as threatened by moves by the governing African National Congress to change the Constitution to allow for land expropriation without compensation. But in a charm offensive on Friday, he told delegates from 36 countries that government’s approach would reaffirm the Constitutional protection of property rights and the prohibition of the arbitrary deprivation of property.

“Together with robust legislation to protect foreign investments, an independent judiciary and the firm rule of law, our Constitution should allay any fears that investors may have of factories being expropriated.” Foreign and domestic investors had responded to these assurances by making investment pledges worth $35-billion over the past few months, including a $14-billion investment pledge from China. In addition firm commitments worth over R100-billion were made at the investment conference. Many of announcements, such as Mercedes-Benz’s R10-billion investment in the Eastern Cape, represented a reconfirmation of investment commitments already made. Others related to sustaining capital at some large operations, including many of the capital programmes outlined as part of Anglo American’s R71.5-billion investment portfolio for the coming five years. AFRICAN SMARTPHONE & 5G NETWORK
However, Mara Group CEO Ashish Thakkar reported that he had been convinced to pursue his R1.5-billion plan to manufacture an African smartphone in South Africa earlier than planned. In addition, Paul Harris from data-only mobile network provider Rain confirmed investments worth R1-billion into a 4G-network deployment and the roll-out, in 2015, of a 5G network in parts of South Africa. South Africa’s two large forest product companies, Sappi and Mondi, confirmed combined capital expenditure programmes worth some R16-billion, including Sappi’s plan to invest R7.7-billion in the expansion of its Saiccor facility, in KwaZulu-Natal. The mill is a leading global producer of dissolving wood pulp, used primarily as a fibre input in textile manufacture. Meanwhile, various mining-related investments were confirmed, including a R21.4-billion plan by Vedanta Zinc International to expand production in the Northern Cape and to investigate a smelting and refinery investment; a R2.5-billion investment by Bushveld Minerals to expand vanadium mining and support local beneficiation; and R4.5-billion by Ivanplats in platinum investment, in Limpopo. South Africa’s Naspers also used the platform provided by the summit to confirm its R6-billion investment plans for South Africa, much of which would be focused on supporting technology start-ups and youth innovation. Ramaphosa said he was aware that many investors had become concerned and disillusioned by South Africa’s recent “stumbles”, but stressed that government was “determined to put behind us the period of uncertainty and discord and embrace a future of cooperation and partnership”. “Following thoroughgoing consultations with various role players in our economy, we have been addressing issues of policy uncertainty and regulatory obstacles that have impeded investments in a number of industries.” He added that immediate steps were being taken to finalise reforms in key sectors such as mining, oil and gas, tourism and telecommunications. The revised Mining Charter had been finalised, government aimed to draft separate legislation for the oil and gas industry, visa rules were being reviewed, and, in electricity, the draft Integrated Resource Plan had been released. “We have finalised consultations with the telecommunications industry and other stakeholders to ensure allocation of spectrum reduces barriers to entry, promotes competition and reduces costs to consumers. Our independent communications regulator is now preparing to licence available high demand spectrum.”