PERTH (miningweekly.com) – Queensland is poised for an upsurge in artificial intelligence (AI), with the resources industry reportedly planning new investments in technology and innovation that will make it one of the state’s most cutting-edge job creators. In its latest quarterly State of the Sector survey, the Queensland Resources Council (QRC) found that 91% of the resource CEOs surveyed were considering further automation activities, while 33% were implementing AI and 8% planned to implement augmented technologies. “The resources industry is one of Queensland's most resilient and innovative sectors. And that’s good news for people who want jobs both now and in the coming decades,” QRC CEO Ian Macfarlane said. “The investments are being targeted to make mining smarter, safer and to deliver even better value to Queenslanders. “New technologies can increase safety for workers through use in hazardous situations such as fires, or preventing collisions in remote operations. New technologies can also be used to maximise the returns from mining projects in a sustainable way. The more of our commodities that are accessible the greater the royalties return for Queensland. “But, there’s no replacing the skills and expertise of resources employees. Importantly, company CEOs see automation and innovation as a way to enhance their mining projects, not focussed as a way to reduce jobs.” Macfarlane said that resources jobs would continue well into the future, as the state’s resources sector strengthens its role as an early adopter of technology and as a global leader in mining expertise. “In fact, more than 80% of resources companies expect the demand for science, technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM) graduates to increase in the next five years.” The State of the Sector report coincided with the Queensland government’s decision to build a cutting-edge AI hub as part of a plan to upskill more Queensland workers to take jobs in the AI sector. Premier Annastacia Palaszczuk said plans for the hub had already attracted great interest from global corporate giants, keen to invest in the Advance Queensland AI Hub at the newly expanded Precinct in Fortitude Valley. “Queensland has a shortage of talent in the artificial intelligence space. Currently we have up to eight times more AI jobs on offer in the state than people with the right skills available to fill them,” the Premier said. “That’s why we’re investing now to make sure we keep those jobs in Queensland.” The precinct to accommodate the new AI Hub is part of the state government’s A$650-million Advance Queensland initiative, which is a whole-of-government programme to foster innovation and build a more diversified Queensland economy, creating jobs. Innovation Minister Kate Jones said the new AI Hub would serve as a training centre and a place for businesses to network. “Not only will this hub create jobs for Queenslanders by upskilling them to fill the AI skills gap, it will also help AI startups to scale up to meet global demand for this technology,” Jones said. “The AI Hub will provide a co-working space for startups along with mentoring and international networking opportunities. It will also help to attract investment into Queensland startups and innovative local companies with AI-based solutions for global markets. "The seed funding provided by the government will act as a catalyst for co-investment by the private sector. “Already we have seen expressions of interest from major international corporations, as well as Australian companies and universities. Specialised training courses will also be offered out of the AI Hub for Queensland industry and public sector organisations.”