PERTH (miningweekly.com) – Diversified miner Glencore has announced plans to ‘reconfigure’ its Hail Creek coal mine, in Queensland, resulting in nearly 400  job losses. The miner announced that the two-dragline operation would be reconfigured into a truck-and-shovel mine, with a seven-day on, seven-day off roster. The restructure would decrease the workforce from the current 1 360 to 930 by the time the changes are fully implemented in the second half of 2019. "We acknowledge the significant impact this will have on our workforce and their families, and we will have in place support services to assist and advise them," a Glencore spokesperson was quoted as saying by the ABC. The Queensland Resources Council (QRC) on Monday said that the strong demand for skills in the Bowen basin resources sector would create new opportunities and jobs for workers affected by the Glencore decision. “I understand this will be a difficult time for workers affected by the changes. But there is strong demand across Central and North Queensland for skilled workers in the resources sector,” QRC CEO Ian Macfarlane said. “Queensland-wide there are about 1 250 vacancies in the resources sector, and more than 440 of those jobs are in the Mackay and Coalfields region. On top of that, there are more than 200 jobs up for grabs in the Rockhampton, Gladstone and wider Central Queensland region. “Global demand continues to grow for the high-quality coal from the Bowen basin. It is the building block for industry around the world. The federal government’s chief economist predicts record export values this year and rising export volumes over the next financial year.” Macfarlane said that Glencore’s decision was focused on ensuring the ongoing viability of the Hail Creek mine, which would help sustain the project through the inevitable fluctuations in the commodity cycle. “The Queensland coal industry has a strong future, and I expect its highly skilled and diverse workforce, including employees from the Hail Creek mine, will continue to be in demand across the sector.” Glencore in August acquired the Hail Creek operation from Rio Tinto as part of a $1.7-billion deal, which also included the Valeria coal development.